---
layout: post
title: Overview (meta) post
subtitle: How to make sense out of this website 
published: true
tags: []
cover-img: ["assets/img/posts/Gondola-Boats.jpg"]
---

We always need some organising to get things done.
This (meta) post serves as a starting point to help navigate around.

##  Concepts

* Log Posts: a chronological chain of resources that I find online
  * relevant tags: `🌊surf_the_web_log📒`
  * `🌊surf_the_web_log📒`: this chain of posts contains videos, articles, thoughts, resources that I find interesting (every month). A way to keep useful 
  * 
* Tutorials: about programming stuff, essentially making few rules and examples to understand the whole procedure
  * relevant tags: `💻code`, `💵money` (finance, economics), `🎥film`, `🎵music`
  * Cheatsheets: why remember stuff, that is not my job. My job is to connect the dots. The Cheatsheets help me develop faster.
  * Checklists: similar to Cheatsheets, they outline how to operate 
    * eg. before pushing a PR for review, 
  * example posts:
* Reviews: about movies, series or books (technical or phylosophical).
  * Upcoming: Designing Data Intensive Applications
  * example posts:
* Wrap up my week (or month): useful resources, articles, yt videos I found. Outstanding information about the world. Maybe a quick review of the historic
facts that happened during the time period.
  * example posts:
* General articles and thoughts: some times I get phylosophical, I wanna share mindset and food for thought.
  * example posts:

##  Todo Posts

This is the posts (or general categories) I am planning to focus on the next months.
* C++ Tutorials Series: simple material to review for myself and others, to be on top of the game
* Tools of a ninja programmer: the everyday tools that 10x productivity, like nvim, zsh, tmux and how to use these
* Crypto notes: I spend a lot of time building software on the crypto space, my notes will be in this series.
maybe this becomes more specific to MEV realted stuff that I focus on lately.
* Rust notes: the new game changer programming language that I really love (especially after learning C++).

